---
layout: page
menu: Publications
title: "Articles published by the LaTeX project by year: 2018"
description: "Selection of links to PDF versions of various articles published by the LaTeX3 project and links to videos of their conference presentations."
---

# Publications in 2018




### <a href="{{site.baseurl}}/publications/2018-version-rollback.pdf" target="_blank" onclick="vgwPixelCall('f018e721a0fe425899cee633a987ebff');">A rollback concept for packages and classes</a> (to appear)

+ [Frank Mittelbach]({{site.baseurl}}/about/team/#frank-mittelbach)
+ Draft for submission to TUGboat, 2018 

An article discussing the new rollback concept for packages and
classes. Together with the `latexrelease` package this forms a
comprehensive release management and compatibility solution for the
LaTeX universe.


***



### <a href="{{site.baseurl}}/publications/2017-CI-Journal-28454894_as_submitted.pdf" target="_blank" onclick="vgwPixelCall('76c39a7e25524b9a8b93f680f6f20cba');">A General LuaTeX Framework for Globally Optimized Pagination</a> (to appear)

+ [Frank Mittelbach]({{site.baseurl}}/about/team/#frank-mittelbach)
+ Paper submitted to the Computational Intelligence Journal (Wiley) in 2017 

This is the pre-peer reviewed version of the article, it will be
replaced by the peer reviewed version after the 12 month embargo
phase. This article may be used for non-commercial purposes in
accordance with Wiley Terms and Conditions for Self-Archiving.

The article is an extended version (37 pages) of the 2016 ACM article
"A General Framework for Globally Optimized Pagination" listed below, providing a
lot more details and additional research results.

***


### <a href="{{site.baseurl}}/publications/tb121gregorio-expl3.pdf" target="_blank" onclick="vgwPixelCall('76c39a7e25524b9a8b93f680f6f20cba');">TeX.StackExchange cherry picking: expl3</a>

+ [Enrico Gregorio]({{site.baseurl}}/about/team/#enrico-gregorio)
+ Paper published in TUGboat 39:1, 2018 

In this article Gregorio presents some examples of macros built with
expl3 in answer to users’ problems presented on
[tex.stackexchange.com](https://tex.stackexchange.com) to give a
flavor of the language and describe its possibilities. Topics include
list printing, string manipulation, macro creation, and graphics.

***


### <a href="{{site.baseurl}}/publications/tb121mitt-bug-reporting.pdf" target="_blank" onclick="vgwPixelCall('76c39a7e25524b9a8b93f680f6f20cba');">New rules for reporting bugs in the LaTeX core software</a>

+ [Frank Mittelbach]({{site.baseurl}}/about/team/#frank-mittelbach)
+ Paper published in TUGboat 39:1, 2018 

An article discussing the new workflow for reporting bugs in the
core LaTeX software. It also covers the underlying move of the LaTeX
sources from an SVN to a Git-based source control system and as a result
the retirement of the old LaTeX bug database.

***


<div class="row">{% include toc.pubbyyear.html %}</div>
<div id="div_vgwpixel"></div>
