---
layout: post
title: "LuaTeX 1.0 announced"
Date: 2016-09-29 00:00:00
description: "LuaTeX stable version announced"
excerpt: "Big congratulations from us to the LuaTeX Team for achieving this
hugely important milestone! It was very much awaited and we are
looking forward to ..."
categories: news
tags: [luatex]
---

# LuaTeX 1.0 announced


Big congratulations from us to the LuaTeX Team for achieving this
hugely important milestone! It was very much awaited and we are
looking forward to seeing more code in the LaTeX world that makes use
of the extended possibilities offered by the LuaTeX engine now that it
has reached a stable state.

Congrats!



### Here is the original announcement from the LuaTeX Team

   Version 1.0.0

   After some ten years of development and testing, today we have released
   LuaTeX 1.0.0! Instead of staying below one and ending up with versions
   like 0.99.1234, we decided that the moment is there to show the TeX
   audience that LuaTeX is stable enough to loose its beta status. Although
   functionality has evolved and sometimes been replaced, we have been using
   LuaTeX in production right from the start. Of course there are bugs
   and for sure we will fix them.

   Our main objective is to provide a variant of TeX that permits user
   extensions without the need to adapt the inner workings. We did add a few
   things here and there but they mostly relate to opening up the inner parts
   and/or the wish to influence some hard coded behaviour. Via Lua we managed
   to support modern functionality without bloating the code or adding more
   and more dependencies on foreign code. In the process a stable and flexible
   MetaPost library became part of the engine.

   The functionality as present now will stay. We might open up some more
   parts, we will stepwise clean up the code base while staying as close as
   possible to the Knuthian original, we will try to document bits and pieces.
   We might also experiment a bit with better isolation of the backend, and
   simplify some internals. For that we might use the experimental version
   but if we divert too much we may need to give that another name.

   We want to thank all those who have tested the betas and helped to make
   LuaTeX better.

   Hans Hagen,
   Hartmut Henkel,
   Taco Hoekwater,
   Luigi Scarso
