---
layout: post
title: "Pre-release of LaTeX 2022-06-01 is available for testing"
date: 2021-03-05 00:00:00
description: "We submitted the latest pre-release version for the 2022-06-01 LaTeX
kernel to CTAN recently. It should have made its way into TeX Live ..."
categories: news
tags: [latex2e, beta-testing, development formats]
---

# Pre-release of LaTeX for 2022-06-01 ready for testing

We submitted the latest pre-release version for the 2022-06-01 LaTeX
kernel to CTAN recently. It should have made its way into TeX Live
(both 2021 and the 2022 pre-test) for everyone by now, so it's ready
for user to try.

It already contains most updates to the LaTeX format that will become part of the standard in June; thus testing the them now will help identifying packages that need upgrading and finding any bugs lurking before the June release hits the streets; see below for how to do this in a safe way.

The highlights are briefly discussed below, further details plus smaller bug fixes and improvements not covered here can be found in the draft version of the <a href="{{site.baseurl}}/news/latex2e-news/ltnews35.pdf">LaTeX2e News Issue 35</a> newsletter.


## New features in the kernel (high-lights)

### For users

One of the most significant changes in the code is one that users (hopefully)
won't notice: the definition of UTF-8 characters in pdfTeX. We have made these
engine-protected, which should make processing them in `expl3` a lot easier.
The way the change has been set up means we don't expect users to actually see
a difference, but we do want to hear about how it is working. So get your complicated
accents out and try them all over the place with pdfTeX. (LuaTeX and XeTeX
users won't even need to worry.) One thing that goes with this change is that
we have updated the definition of `\MakeUppercase` and `\MakeLowercase`, so
they use Unicode-aware `expl3` code 'behind the scenes'. Again, this should
be transparent to users, but it would be good to hear how it works in the wild.

More visible are a small set of new commands we are adding in this pre-release.
We are moving `\fpeval` and `\inteval` from the `xfp` package directly into
the kernel. We are also adding `ExpandArgs` and `UseName`, ideas again taken
from `expl3`. These commands allow control of expansion, so you can do a range
of basic expansion tasks in document commands, without needing TeX programming
or using `expl3`. For example, you can now do
```
\NewDocumentCommand\newcopyedit{mO{red}}
  {\newcounter{todo#1}%
   \ExpandArgs{c}\NewDocumentCommand{#1}{s m}%
     {\stepcounter{todo#1}%
      \IfBooleanTF {##1}%
         {\todo[color=#2!10]%
            {\UseName{thetodo#1}: ##2}}%
         {\todo[inline,color=#2!10]%
            {\UseName{thetodo#1}: ##2}}%
     }%
  }
```
which can create a document command by name: something people have been asking
for many years.

One more addition from `expl3` ideas is `\IfBlankTF`: this can test if it has
been given an entirely blank argument. Here, blank means empty or just spaces:
this comes up surprisingly often.


### For package authors

Package authors might well choose to use the features described above. There
is though one big change aimed squarely at packages: keyval-based option
handling. We have introduced a new set of commands, `\DeclareKeys`,
`\ProcessKeyOptions` and `\SetKeys`, which can be used to create keyvals and
to use them as package options. `\DeclareKeys` uses the same approach as the
`expl3` function `\keys_define:nn` to create keys: each key has one or more
'properties' which control how it behaves. We have provided a small number
of common properties at this stage, for storing key values in a macro, for
setting a switch and for executing some code. We have also provided a method
to define the usage of keys: whether they are only available at package
loading time, in the preamble or can also be used in the document body.
```
\DeclareKeys
  {
    draft.if    = @mypkg@draft      ,
    draft.usage = preamble          ,
    name.store  = \@mypkg@name      ,
    name.usage  = load              ,
    command.code = \showtokens{#1}
```

Package options can then be processed using `\ProcessKeyOptions`, which will
set keys defined by `\DeclareKeys`. Keys can also be set in the document
body using `\SetKeys`. All of these new commands take an optional argument to
define the key _family_: the namespace for the keys. This is by default the name
of the current package file.

More advanced key types can be created directly using `expl3` (`l3keys`): the
keys created by `\DefineKeys` are standard `expl3` keys.

Unlike traditional package options, loading a package using `\ProcessKeyOptions`
multiple times with different options will not lead to a clash error. Instead,
the options will simply be passed to the same key handler. This means that
the package author can control how repeatedly setting the same keys is handled.

### `\DocumentMetadata`

There is one more addition to the kernel for use at the top of the document: `\DocumentMetadata`. It is the trigger to tell LaTeX that the current document is new/modern document that should use concepts not available in traditional LaTeX2e documents, for example, everything developed for the PDF tagging project.

This new command has to come first in a LaTeX document, _before_ `\documentclass`. It is used, as the name suggests, to set metadata about the entire document, but while the PDF tagging project is being worked on, it is also used to enable new code from this project (see the discussion of `latex-lab` below).

Even if used with an empty argument, it will currently already show some effect, by loading the new `pdfmanagement` that offers a reliable and consistent interfaces for packages (such as `hyperref`, `media9`, etc.) that need to set or query PDF resources, so that they can coexist without overwriting their settings in random ways.

The `hyperref` package, for example, will switch to a new driver with extended possibilities, if the `\DocumentMetadata` declaration was used, you can see this with the following simple document, that does shows the new default link colors of the new driver.
```
\DocumentMetadata{}

\documentclass{article}
\usepackage{hyperref}

\begin{document}
\tableofcontents
\section{A link}  \url{https://www.latex-project.org}
\end{document}
```

## The LaTeX-lab bundle

This is a new space to explore ideas that we think may get added to LaTeX. These experimental ideas are only activated if the right key is present in the argument to `\DocumentMetadata`, i.e., they do not affect users who do not wish to experiment with new features. For example, the key `testphase` can be used to enable code that has been developed for the PDF tagging project. We currently are in testphase II of the tagging project, and that can be activated using
```
\DocumentMetadata{testphase = phase-II}
```
This then loads `tagpdf` and additional support code from `latex-lab` and produces documents that have paragraph text and footnotes tagged; further document elements, e.g., headings and lists will follow soon as part of this phase.

The `latex-lab` space may also hold code that we are in the process of moving to the kernel, but that we first want to tests without the danger of disruption, for example, at the moment it hosts the new management code for independent marks, which will either in June of by the end of the year move to the format.


It is possible that some ideas from the lab will be dropped or modified: anyone using them should be mindful of that. However, we expect that most will eventually move to the kernel. Tagging will _always_ require `\DocumentMetadata` to be present, but over time the need to activate it with the `testphase` key will be removed.

## Outlook

We expect to produce another pre-release around the end of April, which will
give us time to finish the release by June. Please help with the testing

Processing your documents with the pre-release is straightforward. All you have
to do is to replace the invocation command by appending -dev to the executable,
e.g., on the command line you would run

 - `pdflatex-dev myfile` or
 - `lualatex-dev myfile` or
 - `xelatex-dev myfile`

instead of using `pdflatex`, `lualatex` or `xelatex`. If you use an integrated
editing environment, then it depends on the system how to configure it to use an
alternative format; but in any case the necessary modification should be
straightforward.


Enjoy --- Joseph & Frank


