---
layout: post
title: "Final pre-release of LaTeX 2023-06-01 is available for testing"
date: 2023-05-27 00:00:00
description: "We submitted the final pre-release version for the 2023-06-01 LaTeX
kernel to CTAN recently. It is ready for testing and exploration of automated tagging."
excerpt: "We submitted the final pre-release version for the 2023-06-01 LaTeX
kernel to CTAN recently. It should have made its way into TeX Live
for everyone by now (or pretty soon), so it's ready for users and developers to try."
categories: news
tags: [latex2e, beta-testing, development formats]
---

# Final pre-release of LaTeX 2023-06-01 is available for testing

We submitted the final pre-release version for the 2023-06-01 LaTeX
kernel to CTAN recently. It should have made its way into TeX Live
for everyone by now (or pretty soon), so it's ready
for users and developers to try.

We did not manage to get everything in that we originally planned for
the June release, but given that the newsletter has seven pages is
some indication that we have been busy. **Please test it out so that
we all can be sure that the main release has no issues.** Given that
we are somewhat late in the schedule we will delay the June release by
a week or two so that developers can verify that their packages will
work smoothly with the new release.

## Automated tagging of PDF documents

We have now enabled new automatic tagging functionality for additional
LaTeX elements, among them most display environments, standard
sectioning commands and content, figure and table listings. Also
supported are standard floats, citations, bibliographies and a few
more elements, but we aren't yet at the point that we can state that all
elements described in Leslie Lamport's manual on LaTeX are supported
--- but we are getting close.

This can be activated through
```
\DocumentMetadata{testphase=phase-III}
\documentclass{...}                     % article, book or report
```
In addition there is also an early prototype for tagging formulas, which can be activated through
```
\DocumentMetadata{testphase={phase-III,math}}
\documentclass{...}
```
It offers support for LaTeX's standard math environments and also for
all environments provided through the `amsmath` package.

All of this automation is currently in a prototype state and
restricted to the use of standard classes (`article`, `report`, and
`book`) and it supports only a limited number of add-on package. See the <a
href="{{site.baseurl}}/news/latex2e-news/ltnews37.pdf">LaTeX2e News
Issue 37</a> newsletter for further details. It provides information
how to submit feedback on the new functionality.


The <a href="{{site.baseurl}}/news/latex2e-news/ltnews37.pdf">newsletter</a>
also covers various other small enhancements or corrections that we
provide with the June release.

## Testing

Processing your documents with the pre-release is straightforward. All you have
to do is to replace the invocation command by appending `-dev` to the executable,
e.g., on the command line you would run

 - `pdflatex-dev myfile` or
 - `lualatex-dev myfile` or
 - `xelatex-dev myfile`

instead of using `pdflatex`, `lualatex` or `xelatex`. If you use an integrated
editing environment, then it depends on the system how to configure it to use an
alternative format; but in any case the necessary modification should be
straightforward.


Enjoy --- Frank


