---
layout: post
title: "Towards automatted PDF tagging: Pre-release of LaTeX 2023-06-01 is available for testing"
date: 2023-03-13 00:00:00
description: "We submitted the second pre-release version for the 2023-06-01 LaTeX
kernel to CTAN recently. It is ready for testing and exploration of automatted tagging."
excerpt: "We submitted the second pre-release version for the 2023-06-01 LaTeX
kernel to CTAN recently. It should have made its way into TeX Live (both 2022 and the 2023 pre-test) for everyone by now, so it's ready for users to try.

It does not yet contain all updates to the LaTeX format that will
become part of the standard in June, but the new code already provided
is worth checking out."
categories: news
tags: [latex2e, beta-testing, development formats]
---

# Towards automatted PDF tagging: Pre-release of LaTeX 2023-06-01 is available for testing

We submitted the second pre-release version for the 2023-06-01 LaTeX
kernel to CTAN recently. It should have made its way into TeX Live
(both 2022 and the 2023 pre-test) for everyone by now, so it's ready
for users to try.

It does not yet contain all updates to the LaTeX format that will
become part of the standard in June, but the new code already provided
is worth checking out.

## Automated tagging of PDF documents

We have now enabled new automatic tagging functionality for additional
LaTeX elements, among them most display environments, standard
sectioning commands and content, figure and table listings.

This can be activated through
```
\DocumentMetadata{testphase=phase-III}
\documentclass{...}                     % article, book or report
```
In addition there is also a (very early) prototype for tagging formulas, which can be activated through
```
\DocumentMetadata{testphase={phase-III,math}}
\documentclass{...}
```
It offers support for LaTeX's standard math environments but also for
all environments provided through the `amsmath` package.

All of this automation is currently in a prototype state and
restricted to the use of standard classes (`article`, `report`, and
`book`) and it supports only a limited number of add-on package. See the
draft version of the <a
href="{{site.baseurl}}/news/latex2e-news/ltnews37.pdf">LaTeX2e News
Issue 37</a> newsletter for further details. It provides information
how to submit feedback on the new functionality.


The newsletter also covers various other small enhancements or
corrections that we intend to provide with the June release.

## Outlook

We expect to produce another pre-release around the end of April, which will
give us time to finish the release by June. Please help with the testing.

Processing your documents with the pre-release is straightforward. All you have
to do is to replace the invocation command by appending `-dev` to the executable,
e.g., on the command line you would run

 - `pdflatex-dev myfile` or
 - `lualatex-dev myfile` or
 - `xelatex-dev myfile`

instead of using `pdflatex`, `lualatex` or `xelatex`. If you use an integrated
editing environment, then it depends on the system how to configure it to use an
alternative format; but in any case the necessary modification should be
straightforward.


Enjoy --- Frank


