---
layout: post
title: "Pre-release 1 of LaTeX 2026-06-01 is available for testing"
date: 2026-01-27
description: "First pre-release version for the 2026-06-01 LaTeX kernel went to CTAN last weekend."
excerpt: "We submitted the first pre-release version for the 2026-06-01 LaTeX kernel to CTAN recently"
categories: news
tags: [latex2e, beta-testing, development formats]
---

# Pre-release 1 of LaTeX 2026-06-01 is available for testing

The first pre-release version for the 2025-11-01 LaTeX kernel went to CTAN few
days ago: it's now in TeX Live, and we hope people will test it out.

Work continues on bringing more flexible and predictable design support to
different areas of the kernel: this is needed for tagged PDF output but also
helps more generally in making it easier to customize LaTeX.

Most notably, block environments (such as lists, quotes and proofs), and
sectioning commands (`\chapter`, `\section` and so forth) have been
re-implemented using the template system. This means that the code is entirely
new if you use `\DocumentMetadata`. This is an area that we'd particularly
encourage interested users to test, particularly with varied package loading.
For the more adventurous, please try out modifying the templates!

Supporting work on the lower-level template and document command architecture
continues, with a modification to the `-NoValue-` concept and support for
recovering instance values.

To help users find the various newer features, we have made a start on a single
documentation file, currently called `latex-cmds` (very much a working title).
This already contains the documentation for

- Hooks (including shipout, command and generic hooks)
- Properties
- Sockets
- Templates

and over time we expect to add more information, first for newer features and
then more generally.

For full details of all of the changes planned for 2026-06-01, see the draft <a
href="{{site.baseurl}}/news/latex2e-news/ltnews43.pdf">LaTeX News 43</a>.

Enjoy --- Joseph


