---
layout: post
title: "Time for testing: the final pre-release for 2026-06 is available"
date: 2026-05-08
description: "The second and final pre-release version for the 2026-06-01 LaTeX kernel went to CTAN few days ago."
excerpt: "The second and final pre-release version for the 2026-06-01 LaTeX kernel went to CTAN few days ago. We encourage everybody to try it out on their documents (and developers on their packages) so that there will be no unwanted surprises ..."
categories: news
tags: [latex2e, beta-testing, development formats]
---

# Time for testing: the final pre-release for 2026-06 is available

The second and final pre-release version for the 2026-06-01 LaTeX kernel went to CTAN few days ago. We encourage everybody to try it out on their documents (and developers on their packages) so that there will be no unwanted surprises when the June release hits the streets. Just run your documents with `pdflatex-dev` or `lualatex-dev` or use `l3build check --dev` if you are a developer who uses `l3build` for your packages.


Further improvements have been made to the `\DocumentMetadata` command, with new
keys for language support (`language` and `other-languages`) which read standard
BCP-47 strings.

We have done more work on revising document command concepts in this
pre-release, with the handling of empty key--value lists by
`\NewDocumentCommand` adjusted to work more smoothly with a move from classical
positional arguments.

The code for block templates has been further refined to allow more fine-grained
customization, and better emulation of the `enumitem` package. There are also
improvements to debugging support for templates.

To assist with copy-paste of text from PDFs, we have further improved
support for Unicode mappings for the standard math mode fonts.

A number of subtle spacing bugs in `amsmath` have been addressed in this
pre-release: testing is strongly encouraged in this area.

After a bit of consideration, we have renamed the collected documentation for
'newer' commands to `cmdguide` (from `latex-cmds`): this fits better with the
long-standing set of 'guide' files.

As always, for full details of all of the changes planned for 2026-06-01, see
the draft <a href="{{site.baseurl}}/news/latex2e-news/ltnews43.pdf">LaTeX News 43</a>.

Enjoy --- Joseph


